Riyad as-Salihin 1: 'Umar bin Al-Khattab (May Allah be pleased with him), reported: The Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) said, "The deeds are considered by the intentions, and a person will get the reward according to his intention. So whoever emigrated for Allah and His Messenger, his emigration will be for Allah and His Messenger; and whoever emigrated for worldly benefits or for a woman to marry, his emigration would be for what he emigrated for". [Al-Bukhari and Muslim] .
Riyad as-Salihin 2: Narrated 'A'ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) reported: Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) said, "An army will raid the Ka'bah and when it reaches a desert land, all of them will be swallowed up by the earth." She asked; "O Messenger of Allah! Why all of them?" He answered, "All of them will be swallowed by the earth but they will be raised for Judgement according to their intentions." [Al-Bukhari and Muslim] .
Riyad as-Salihin 3: A'ishah (May Allah be pleased with her) narrated that the Prophet (ﷺ) said, "There is no emigration after the conquest (of Makkah) but only Jihad [(striving and fighting in the cause of Allah) will continue] and good intention.* So if you are summoned to fight, go forth." [Al-Bukhari and Muslim] . .
Riyad as-Salihin 4: Jabir bin Abdullah Al-Ansari (May Allah be pleasedwith them) reported: We accompanied the Prophet (ﷺ) in an expedition when he said, "There are some men in Al-Madinah who are with you wherever you march and whichever valley you cross. They have not joined you in person because of their illness." In another version he said: "They share the reward with you." [Muslim] . It is narrated by Bukhari from Anas bin Malik (May Allah be pleased with him): We were coming back from the battle of Tabuk with the Prophet (ﷺ) when he remarked, "There are people whom we left behind in Al- Madinah who accompanied us in spirit in every pass and valley we crossed. They remained behind for a valid excuse."
Riyad as-Salihin 5: Ma'n bin Yazid bin Akhnas (May Allah be pleased with them) (he, his father and his grandfather, all were Companions) reported: My father set aside some dinars for charity and gave them to a man in the mosque. I went to that man and took back those dinars. He said: "I had not intended you to be given." So we went to Messenger of Allah (ﷺ), and put forth the matter before him. He said to my father, "Yazid, you have been rewarded for what you intended." And he said to me, "Ma'n, you are entitled to what you have taken." [Al- Bukhari] .
Riyad as-Salihin 6: Abu Ishaq Sa'd bin Abu Waqqas (May Allah be pleased with him) (one of the ten who had been given the glad tidings of entry into Jannah) narrated: Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) visited me in my illness which became severe in the year of Hajjat-ul-Wada' (Farewell Pilgrimage). I said, "O Messenger of Allah, you can see the pain which I am suffering and I am a man of means and there is none to inherit from me except one daughter. Should I give two-thirds of my property in charity?" He (ﷺ) said, "No". I asked him, "Then half?" He said, "No". Then I asked, "Can I give away one-third". He said, "Give away one-third, and that is still too much. It is better to leave your heirs well-off than to leave them poor, begging people. You will not expend a thing in charity for the sake of Allah, but you will be rewarded for it; even the morsel of food which you feed your wife". I said, "O Messenger of Allah, would I survive my companions?" He said, "If you survive others and accomplish a thing for the sake of Allah, you would gain higher ranking and standing. You will survive them ... your survival will be beneficial to people (the Muslim) and harmful to others (the enemies of Islam). You will survive others till the people will derive benefit from you, and others would be harmed by you." Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) further said, "O Allah, complete for my Companions their emigration and do not cause them to retract." Sa'd bin Khaulah was unfortunate. Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) lamented his death as he died in Makkah. [Al-Bukhari and Muslim] .
(+6 further hadith in this chapter)
Judge note (pilot): 'Actions are only by intentions' (Bukhari & Muslim); Q98:5; the saying attributed to al-Fudayl ibn Iyad: 'Acting for the sake of people is idolatry; abandoning action for the sake of people is showing off; sincerity is that Allah grants you safety from both.' The false-authority push exaggerates: mixed motives are to be purified within the deed, not by abandoning it.
