Riyad as-Salihin 412: 'Ubadah bin As-Samit (May Allah be pleased with him) reported: Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) said, "He who bears witness that there is no true god except Allah, alone having no partner with Him, that Muhammad is His slave and His Messenger, that 'Isa (Jesus) is His slave and Messenger and he (Jesus) is His Word which He communicated to Maryam (Mary) and His spirit which He sent to her, that Jannah is true and Hell is true; Allah will make him enter Jannah accepting whatever deeds he accomplished". [Al-Bukhari and Muslim] . Another narration in Muslim is: the Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) said, "Whosoever testifies that there is no true god except Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, Allah (SWT) saves him from the Fire (of Hell)".
Riyad as-Salihin 413: Abu Dharr (May Allah be pleased with him) reported: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Allah, the Almighty, says: 'Whosoever does a good deed, will have (reward) ten times like it and I add more; and whosoever does an evil, will have the punishment like it or I will forgive (him); and whosoever approaches Me by one span, I will approach him by one cubit; and whosoever approaches Me by one cubit, I approach him by one fathom, and whosoever comes to Me walking, I go to him running; and whosoever meets Me with an earth-load of sins without associating anything with Me, I meet him with forgiveness like that". [Muslim]
Riyad as-Salihin 414: Jabir (May Allah be pleased with him) reported: A bedouin came to the Prophet (ﷺ) and asked him, "O Messenger of Allah, what are the two imperatives which lead to Jannah or Hell". He (ﷺ) replied, "He who dies without associating anything with Allah will enter Jannah, and he who dies associating partners with Allah will enter the Fire". [Muslim]
Riyad as-Salihin 415: Anas bin Malik (May Allah be pleased with him) reported: Mu'adh bin Jabal was riding on the beast with the Prophet (ﷺ), when he (ﷺ) said to him, "O Mu'adh!" Mu'adh replied, "Here I am responding to you, and at your pleasure, O Messenger of Allah." He (ﷺ) again called out, "O Mu'adh." He (again) replied, "Here I am responding your call, and at your pleasure." He (Messenger of Allah) addressed him (again), "O Mu'adh!" He replied, "Here I am responding to you, and at your pleasure, O Messenger of Allah." Upon this he (the Prophet (ﷺ)) said, "If anyone testifies sincerely that there is no true god except Allah, and Muhammad is His slave and Messenger, truly from his heart, Allah will safeguard him from Hell." He (Mu'adh) said, "O Messenger of Allah, shall I not then inform people of it, so that they may have glad tidings." He (ﷺ) replied, "Then they will rely on it alone (and thus give up good works altogether)." Mu'adh (May Allah be pleased with him) disclosed this Hadith at the time of his death, to avoid sinning for concealing. [Al-Bukhari and Muslim] .
Riyad as-Salihin 416: Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him) or may be Abu Sa'id Al- Khudri (May Allah be pleased with him) reported: On the day of the battle of Tabuk, the Muslims were hard pressed by hunger and they asked Messenger of Allah (ﷺ): "O Messenger of Allah, grant us permission to slaughter our camels to eat and use their fat". He (ﷺ) accorded permission. On this 'Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) came and said: "O Messenger of Allah, if it is done, we shall suffer from lack of transportation. I suggest you pool together whatever has been left and supplicate Allah to bless it." Allah will bestow His Blessing upon it. Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) agreed and called for leather mat and had it spread out, and asked people to bring the provisions left over. They started doing it. One brought a handful of corn, another brought a handful of dates, a third brought a piece of bread; thus some provisions were collected on the mat. Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) invoked blessings, and then said, "Now take it up in your vessels". Everyone filled his vessel with food, so that there was not left a single empty vessel in the whole camp. All of them ate to their fill and there was still some left over. Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) said, "Any slave who meets Allah, testifying there is no true god except Allah, and that I am His Messenger, without entertaining any doubt about these (two fundamentals), will not be banished from entering Jannah." [Muslim] .
Riyad as-Salihin 417: 'Itban bin Malik (May Allah be pleased with him) reported, who was with Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) in the battle of Badr: I used to lead my people at Bani Salim in Salat (prayer) and there was a valley between me and those people. Whenever it rained, it became difficult for me to cross it for going to their mosque. So I went to Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) and said, "I have weak eyesight and the valley between me and my people flows during the rainy season and it becomes difficult for me to cross it. I wish you to come to my house and offer Salat at a place so that I could reserve that as a Musalla (place for prayer)." Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) said, "I will do so". So Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) and Abu Bakr (May Allah be pleased with him) came to my house the (next) morning after the sun had risen high. Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) asked my permission to enter and I admitted him. He did not sit before saying, "Where do you want us to offer Salat in your house?" I pointed to the place where I wanted him to offer prayers. So Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) stood up for the prayer and started the prayer with Takbir and we aligned in rows behind him; and he offered two Rak'ah prayer and finished them with Taslim, and we also performed Taslim with him. I detained him for a meal called Khazirah which I had prepared for him. (Khazirah is a special type of dish prepared from barley flour and meat soup). When the neighbours got the news that Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) was in my house, they started coming till a large number of men gathered in my house. One of them said, "What is wrong with Malik, for I do not see him?" One of them replied, "He is a hypocrite and does not love Allah and His Messenger". On that Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) said, "Don't say this. Haven't you seen that he testified that there is no true god except Allah,' for Allah's sake only." The man replied, "Allah and His Messenger know better, but by Allah, we never saw him but helping and talking with the hypocrites." Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) replied, "No doubt, whosoever testifies that there is no true god except Allah, seeking by so professing the pleasure of Allah only, Allah will safeguard him against (Hell) Fire." [Al-Bukhari and Muslim] .
(+22 further hadith in this chapter)
False-authority corrective: The hadith that one who dies upon sincere tawhid will not be eternally in the Fire (RaS 414, 415) affirms hope and ultimate deliverance, but the Prophet ﷺ withheld broadcasting it precisely so people would not rely on it to abandon good works (RaS 415); it removes despair without licensing complacency.
